|**Investiture**|
|-|-|
|**Related to**|[[Shard\|Shards]], [[Realmatic Theory\|Realmatic Theory]]|
|**Universe**|[[Cosmere\|Cosmere]]|

This page or section needs to be updated with new information for *Rhythm of War*!Be aware that in its current state, it may not include all additional content yet.

**Investiture** is a term describing the energy that infuses the [[Cosmere\|cosmere]] and on which all cosmere magic systems are based.

## Contents

1 Terminology
2 The Nature of Investiture

2.1 Anti-Investiture


3 Accessing Investiture
4 Intent of use
5 Color

5.1 Shards
5.2 Color in Investiture

5.2.1 Nalthis
5.2.2 Rosharan system
5.2.3 Other




6 Healing

6.1 Healing the soul
6.2 Limitations
6.3 Perception of oneself
6.4 Types of known Investiture healing

6.4.1 Metallic Arts
6.4.2 The Dor
6.4.3 Rosharan system
6.4.4 Other




7 Bonds

7.1 Types of known Bonding Entities
7.2 Bonds By Shard World

7.2.1 Roshar Bonds
7.2.2 Sel Bonds
7.2.3 First of the Sun Bonds
7.2.4 Nalthis Bonds
7.2.5 Scadrial Bonds


7.3 The Known effect of Bonds while on other Shardworlds

7.3.1 Roshar




8 Categories of Investiture

8.1 End-positive Investiture
8.2 End-neutral Investiture
8.3 End-negative Investiture


9 Investiture of Humans
10 Investiture of Objects
11 Investiture of Natural Phenomena
12 Manifestations of Investiture
13 Notes


## Terminology
The term **Investiture** has only seen in-world use in or by the [[Seventeenth Shard\|Seventeenth Shard]], [[Scadrial\|Scadrians]], [[Vasher\|Vasher]], [[Riino\|Riino]], the [[Herald\|Heralds]], and [[Spren\|spren]]. Most who refer to Investiture use terminology specific to the world in which they reside; Feruchemists refer to the process of Investing a [[Metalmind\|Metalmind]] as 'filling', and [[Windrunner\|Windrunners]] refer to the process by which they create [[Lashing\|Lashings]] as 'infusing'. Most characters using this term understand more cogently that the [[Cosmere\|cosmere]] encompasses worlds and systems of magic other than their own.

## The Nature of Investiture
Investiture transcends the three realms: Physical, Cognitive, and Spiritual that comprise most of the cosmere. However, it is more Spiritual than anything. In the Physical Realm, Investiture is known to exist in solid, (i.e. [[Atium\|atium]] and [[Lerasium\|lerasium]]), liquid ([[Perpendicularity\|Shardpools]]), and gaseous material forms ([[Mist\|Preservation's Mists]], [[Light\|Light]], [[BioChromatic Breath\|BioChromatic Breath]]). For some reason, all solid Investiture is metallic, the result of one of the laws governing the cosmere. Most often these appear due to influence by a [[Shard\|Shard]] holder, however some formations occur in a more natural way. Some solid Investiture, like atium, breaks the general rules regarding how Invested objects interact with Investiture. Investiture works in a similar fashion to energy in that it follows its own version of the laws of thermodynamics. It is not possible to destroy Investiture; it can only be redistributed. There are at least four laws that govern Investiture, with the fourth one relating to Adonalsium. Large amounts of Investiture concentrated in a specific location tend to pierce a hole in the three realms (Spiritual, Cognitive, and Physical) and create a Perpendicularity. This effect is similar to the gravity generated by large amounts of matter. Large amounts of Investiture can also create a time dilation.
An interesting thing to note is that the color red has a tendency to manifest when a Shard is "co-opting or corrupting another Shard's magic". All Investiture creates some type of emotional reaction in users.

### Anti-Investiture
Physical matter is known to have a counterpart called antimatter - matter composed of antiparticles that share many properties with the particles of ordinary matter, but manifest some of them in an opposite way (e.g. a proton and an antiproton have the same mass, but opposite electric charges and magnetic moments). The [[Fused\|Fused]] scholar [[Raboniel\|Raboniel]] describes this in terms of axi with opposite polarities. A similar relationship exists between Investiture and anti-Investiture in the cosmere. When Investiture combines with its corresponding anti-Investiture, they are both annihilated, resulting in the release of a large amount of energy. The reaction seems to be more violent when the two are brought together under pressure.
The only known forms of anti-Investiture are [[Anti-Stormlight\|anti-Stormlight]] and [[Anti-Voidlight\|anti-Voidlight]]. It is unknown whether hybrid Lights and Shards outside of the Rosharan system have anti-Investitures of their own. [[Khriss\|Khriss]] notes that the existence of anti-Investiture has been theorized for some time, but that the anti-Lights developed by [[Navani Kholin\|Navani Kholin]] and Raboniel are her first evidence that it actually exists.

## Accessing Investiture
Many methods of accessing Shardic power have been observed throughout the cosmere, but all share certain cardinal similarities; an established connection or ability to create a connection to a source of power and a way of directing that power. Methods of accessing Investiture can be broadly divided into two types: physical and mechanical; the source of the Investiture (end-positive, end-neutral, or end-negative) also plays a role in the way the power is accessed.
Several end-positive magics share the trait of requiring a Spiritual shift of some kind; Elantrians are more closely attuned to the Spiritual Realm (incidentally, this is why [[Hemalurgy\|Hemalurgy]] gets more from them), Allomancers, in Classical Scadrial, had to Snap to access power, and Surgebinders "plug" spren into themselves. Once a conduit has been established, a key, such as an Aon, metal, or Command, is used to tell it how to act.
While a key is generally used, [[Shard\|Shards]] can also choose to use their Investiture to power magic: [[Endowment\|Endowment]] breaks pieces off itself to resurrect the [[Returned\|Returned]], and [[Preservation\|Preservation]] powers Vin's Allomancy with the Mists; some magics, such as [[BioChroma\|BioChroma]] and [[Feruchemy\|Feruchemy]], deal with the use of power that already exists within a human (be that naturally or by Shardic intervention). Others lack an explicit key; instead of pulling power directly from a Shard, Surgebinders draw from the Investiture of highstorms, and direct it through their bond with their spren, similarly to [[Fabrial\|fabrials]].

## Intent of use
The intent of a user is very important to several magic systems; these magic systems require a mental component to function. Some, like Hemalurgy, simply require that someone intend to make a spike when they do it, and others, like Awakening, require complex images created in your mind with the spoken command to function. Hemalurgy has only one known mental component: that the user or [[Shard\|Shard]] must be trying to do Hemalurgy (this is [[Ruin\|Ruin's]] intent when [[Spook\|Spook]] temporarily gains the ability to burn pewter). This mental component, if not present, renders the spike to a normal metal spike and simply harms the victim. When present, it controls what is stolen when used in conjunction with the correct binding point. Awakening is almost as much mental as spoken. If the visualizing of the command is not firm, the Awakened object can behave in a unknown manner or not at all. The more complex the command the more important that mental component is. In [[Surgebinding\|Surgebinding]], the mental component has varying degrees of necessity depending on the [[Surge\|Surge]] used. Lightweaving requires an extremely clear image in a user's mind to create an illusion with the appropriate appearance, but with Surges like Gravitation the user does not have to have any idea of what they are doing; the Surge will do the same thing regardless. Some Surges do require simply that the user wish it to happen. Often with Surgebinding this can be accomplished by instinctively pushing [[Stormlight\|Stormlight]] into something.

## Color
Color is an important part of the cosmere and its magics, and is relevant to every manifestation of Investiture. Some magic systems are connected through how color works within them. Certain colors are linked to a change in Investiture, such as corrupted Investiture being red. How color is viewed and therefore how it affects Investiture is mainly through people's perception of it. Holding large amounts of Investiture for prolonged periods, such as with Breaths and Dawnshards, will give a person enhanced perception of colors.

### Shards
Every Shard is associate with certain colors. Their perpendicularities are also associated with their colors.








### Color in Investiture







**Fabrials**: The color of a gemstone determines its flavor to a spren, and can be used to attract certain types of spren.




## Healing
Many magic systems in the [[Cosmere\|cosmere]] are able to heal a person from damage. This includes physical wounds or sprains, and can even heal fatal damage. Limbs and body parts can be regrown as well. Healing can also be used to recover from poisoning, sickness such as a cold or cancer, chronic diseases, such as poor eyesight, tiredness, and even damage to the [[Spiritweb\|soul]]. Constantly healing from wounds can leave the user invulnerable to pain. Most forms of extreme healing don't care much about what is done to the physical body, as long as the person's spiritual template is in power at the time. Some magic systems are better at healing than others.
Memories can be restored via healing, as they are stored with the Cognitive version of a person.

### Healing the soul
When healing the soul, such as a missing piece cut off from a [[Shardblade\|Shardblade]], a new patch of soul will be created. Healing wounds to the soul is much more [[Spiritual Realm\|Spiritual Realm]] based. If a magic is strong enough to heal from pieces of a body, it will try to heal from the biggest piece. If the body was perfectly cut in half, a random half would be chosen to heal from. Not every magic system is capable of healing soul wounds. If the soul leaves the body and is then healed, the soul will not return and the physical body will be the only thing healed, leaving the person dead. If a soul is healed but not reattached properly, the person will leave a glowing afterimage when they move, though it is only visible to those who are highly Invested or connected to the [[Cognitive Realm\|Cognitive Realm]].

### Limitations
While a number of things can be healed, there are certain limitations. Disorders like depression that are a part of a person's personality will not be cured. Electrical stimulation of muscles, such as being electrocuted, will not be healed as it's not doing any harm and it's how muscles normally work. Aging and certain genetic diseases can also not be healed.
Many, if not all, magical healing processes are stopped by [[Aluminum\|aluminum]]. If aluminum is in the wound, it makes it impossible for wounds to heal around the aluminum until it is removed from the body.

### Perception of oneself
Healing works by using the three versions of the user's self; their Physical, Cognitive, and Spiritual version. Healing typically heals the Physical version by matching it to their ideal Spiritual version, which is filtered through the lens of their minds (Cognitive version). Almost all forms of healing in the cosmere are filtered through the perception of the user. This applies to both internal and external forms of healing. When someone is healing someone else, both of their perceptions matter. If a person hasn't accepted a wound as a part of themselves, they can still heal it regardless of how long they've had it. However, even if a wound is recent, if the person has changed their mindset to see it as a part of themselves, they will not be able to heal from it. Perception can also have users change their body to match their identity, such as a transgender person changing their biological sex. There are a few magic systems that are an exception to this rule.
Highly Invested individuals can shift their Spiritual self to more closely match their Cognitive self, making self-perception more important in the process. This allows for the healing of old wounds if the person doesn't view them as being part of themself, something that is impossible with less Invested individuals.

### Types of known Investiture healing



















## Bonds
Bonds are connections between entities in the [[Cosmere\|cosmere]] that exist outside the [[Physical Realm\|Physical Realm]]. All bonds are basically the same, with the powers and functions depending on the holders of the bond. [[Shardworld\|Shardworlds]] can also have an effect on what the bond does. Bonds are typically formed between entities with greater-than-normal Investiture (e.g. [[Spren\|Spren]]) and other entities, allowing them to gain enhancements. It is unknown if a person with only innate Investiture is able to create a bond. Bonds are not limited to connections of entities with greater-than-normal Investiture to innately Invested entities; they can also be made between two entities with greater-than-normal Investiture.

### Types of known Bonding Entities
**Spren**: Entities of the [[Cognitive Realm\|Cognitive Realm]]
**Type IV BioChromatic Entities**: Intelligent inorganic entities created through the use of [[Breath\|Breath]].
**Seons**: Intelligent entities with connections to [[AonDor\|AonDor]]
**Aviar**: Birds infected with symbiotic worms native to the [[Pantheon\|Pantheon]]

### Bonds By Shard World

**The Nahel Bond**: This Bond is between a human and certain types of intelligent [[Spren\|Spren]]. The [[Nahel bond\|Nahel bond]] gives a human access to the system of magic known as [[Surgebinding\|Surgebinding]], while granting the spren the ability to maintain their cognition in the Physical Realm. There are ten known forms the [[Nahel bond\|Nahel bond]] can take, each giving access to two different [[Surge\|Surges]]. See [[Surgebinding\|Surgebinding]] and [[Nahel bond\|Nahel bond]] for more information.
**Singer Bond**: The [[Singer\|singers]] can bond with a spren. Doing so grants the singer a form (a specific physical and mental change). Not all spren grant a unique form; most spren give the singers dullform. Without a spren, singers exist in what is known as slaveform ([[Parshmen\|Parshmen]]). Singers in slaveform have very little mental capacity and are extremely docile. Dullform gives more free will and a small increase in mental capacity. Slaveform and dullform are physically similar. Singers can become [[Surgebinder\|Surgebinders]], but forms of power exist that grant them abnormal abilities. See [[Singer\|singer]] for more information on the various forms.
**Shardblade**: [[Shardblade\|Shardblades]] are able to bond with people through the use of charged gemstones. The gem is placed in the hilt of the Blade and after a week of constant contact, the Blade is bonded and can be dismissed from and recalled to the [[Physical Realm\|Physical Realm]]. Once bonded the blade can be dismissed and recalled by syncing with the user's heart to the blade. Ten heartbeats are required. A person's iris will lighten during the bonding process. [[Surgebinding\|Surgebinding]] is not granted by this bond.
**Nergaoul**: [[Nergaoul\|Nergaoul]] is able to bond with a humans who embrace the Thrill. This imbues them with bloodlust and the urge to fight above all else. With the help of [[Odium\|Odium]], he is able to fully control large groups of people through the bond.
**Yelig-nar**: [[Yelig-nar\|Yelig-nar]] is able to bond with a human or [[Singer\|singer]], and grants his host the use of all ten Surges. The people he bonds with appear to remain fully in control of themselves, but they must control Yelig-nar if they do not wish to be consumed by him.
**Lesser Spren Bonds**: Non-intelligent spren are able to form bonds with humans. This bond does not grant [[Surgebinding\|Surgebinding]].
**Other Spren Bonds**: Certain spren bond with animals native to Roshar, enhancing those animals and granting them abilities. Animals that are confirmed to have these bonds are [[Chasmfiend\|chasmfiends]], chulls, [[Larkin\|Larkin]], [[Ryshadium\|Ryshadium]], and [[Skyeel\|skyeels]].
**Honorblades**: Honorblades grant surgebinding abilities to humans who touch them, but this requires dangerous levels of stormlight.


**Seons**: A [[Seon\|seon]] can create bonds with humans and [[Elantrian\|Elantrians]]. Little is known of this bond other than that the [[Seon\|seon]] follows and helps the person it is bonded to, functioning as a servant to the owner of the bond. This bond does not give the [[Seon\|seon]] an innate ability to find the human to whom it is bonded. [[Seon\|Seons]] will automatically seek out a new person to bond with following the death of its master; often the new master has been prearranged. During the time of the [[Reod\|Reod]], while the [[Shaod\|Shaod]] was unable to finish transforming a human into an [[Elantrian\|Elantrian]], any [[Seon\|seon]] bonded to a [[Elantrian\|Elantrian]] lost its mind and would float around the city, often near their master. This bond grants new unknown powers to the members of the bond while on [[Roshar\|Roshar]] and is very similar to a [[Nahel bond\|Nahel bond]].


**Aviar**: [[Aviar\|Aviars]] create a bond with a person and grant a specific power based of the type of Aviar bonded. Aviar are granted their ability if raised on one of the pantheon islands and consume a worm native to the island. See [[Aviar\|Aviar]] for more information.
**Other Worm Infected Animals** Other birds besides native island [[Aviar\|Aviar]] are able to eat the worms and create a bond with a new effect (i.e. Sak). It is unknown if eating the worms will grant new abilities to other non-bird animals.


**Sentient Awakened Entities in an Inorganic Host**: Also known as Type IV BioChromatic Entities. The only known entities of this kind are [[Nightblood\|Nightblood]] and Azure's Sword. [[Nightblood\|Nightblood]] is a sentient sword made using a thousand Breaths and the Command to destroy evil. It makes a bond with anyone with whom it wishes to communicate, and it is able to read and speak with minds directly. Distance appears to be a factor, but this may be a limitation of the mind of [[Nightblood\|Nightblood]] and not its ability. While idle, [[Nightblood\|Nightblood]] reaches out to other people, tempting them to draw the blade. "Pure" people who cannot be tempted would feel great nausea, even induce vomiting. Anyone who is able to wield [[Nightblood\|Nightblood]] and survive, bonds with the blade to a greater degree and is no longer repelled by or abnormally drawn to use it. Those unable to control [[Nightblood\|Nightblood]] are controlled by it, in effect [[Nightblood\|Nightblood]] wields them killing everyone around and absorbing all of the  from the victim including the spark of life (i.e. the soul). This bond may grant additional powers on Roshar.


No bonds are known of on this Shardworld.
Of note is that by using [[Hemalurgy\|Hemalurgy]], bonds may be stolen and given to a new person.

### The Known effect of Bonds while on other Shardworlds
Bonds on some Shardworlds provide the Holders of the bonds with additional powers.


It has been confirmed that bonds other than the [[Nahel bond\|Nahel bond]] will provide powers to the constituent entities of that bond while on Roshar. What these powers are is unknown, and will not be of the ten [[Surge\|Surges]]. The seon bond is confirmed to do this, as the Nahel bond and the seon bond are very similar.

## Categories of Investiture
In the *Alloy of Law* Ars Arcanum, the [[Khriss\|author]] categorizes the three [[Metallic Arts\|Metallic Arts]]. Every type of Investiture can be classified along these categories.

### End-positive Investiture
When practicing an end-positive Investiture, the practitioner draws in power from an external source. The practitioner gains power from the external source. The Investiture is positive in that it adds -- in most cases temporarily -- power to the practitioner. Most types of Investiture are end-positive.
Allomancy draws Investiture from [[Preservation\|Preservation]] in a similar way to [[AonDor\|AonDor]] pulling power from the [[Dor\|Dor]]; both are considered End-Positive since they add power to the Allomancer or Elantrian. Allomantic [[Atium\|Atium]] draws power from [[Ruin\|Ruin's]] concentrated Physical form, but is still considered End-Positive as the power comes from an outside source. [[Stormlight\|Stormlight]] acts as an external source to the [[Surge\|Surges]], so the system is also end-positive.

### End-neutral Investiture
For an act of Investiture to be considered end-neutral, power is neither gained nor lost. A practitioner manipulates power that already exists or power that comes from themselves.
[[Feruchemy\|Feruchemy]] is end-neutral, since the amount of Investiture remains constant. Awakening is also considered end-neutral, even though color is lost.

### End-negative Investiture
In the practice of an end-negative Investiture, some power is lost. End-negative Investiture is very rare.
[[Hemalurgy\|Hemalurgy]] is end-negative. Investiture held in a spike outside the body decays.

## Investiture of Humans
All living creatures on some level have Investiture. This is called the spark of life. All sentient creatures have a slightly greater amount of Investiture than non-intelligent ones. The spark of life or soul of a person creates a kind of interference when working with other forms of Investiture. This interference is the reason that metal inside of a person's body is highly resistant to Allomantic steel or iron. To affect something like metal inside a person's body takes a much greater degree of Investiture than most humans are capable of wielding. This is of note because a human's soul does not count as a highly Invested object and a person is not even counted as being innately Invested if they only have the spark of life.
Generally, humans are not considered to have **innate Investiture**. However, on some worlds, a Shard has Invested humans. For example, [[Preservation\|Preservation]] gave part of his power to make sentient humans with the ability to develop Allomancy. On [[Nalthis\|Nalthis]], people are born with [[Breath\|Breath]]. Both cases are known as **innate Investiture**. For example, on [[Nalthis\|Nalthis]] every person is born with a breath and has innate Investiture, but a person who has given up their breath is no longer innately Invested while still maintaining their spark of life.
Under specific conditions, some humans can become Invested with more power than others. In general, the closer the connection between a human and a Shard, the more powerful the human becomes. A normal human on Scadrial is less connected to [[Preservation\|Preservation's]] Investiture than a [[Misting\|Misting]], who is less connected than a Mistborn, who is less connected than [[Allomancer\|Mistborn]] who has consumed [[Lerasium\|Lerasium]] (the direct Physical essence of [[Preservation\|Preservation]]), who is less connected than a person using a pool of liquid Investiture like the [[Well of Ascension\|Well of Ascension]]. A human who is holding a [[Shard\|Shard]] is basically pure Investiture and cannot really be considered human while holding a [[Shard\|Shard]].
The conditions required for becoming Invested with a larger amount of power differ from Shardworld to Shardworld. It is assumed that the intent of the respective Shard influences these conditions. On [[Scadrial\|Scadrial]] Connection to a Shard is determined by genetics. On [[Sel\|Sel]] it's the [[Shaod\|Shaod]] that comes to those who live in the correct area and are devoted to something, and on [[Roshar\|Roshar]] it has to do with a person's actions and how they live their life.

## Investiture of Objects
Objects are not Invested in their original state. They can become Invested by a Shard or by a human having met the above-mentioned requirements. An Invested object gains magical properties. The more Invested an object is, the more power it has. Examples for Invested objects include:

filled [[Metalmind\|metalminds]] of a [[Feruchemist\|Feruchemist]]
a charged [[Hemalurgic\|Hemalurgic]] spike ([[Vin's earring\|Vin's earring]], [[Wax's earring\|Wax's earring]])
any Awakened object
[[Nightblood\|Nightblood]], as a Type IV Biochromatic Entity
[[Shardplate\|Shardplate]] and [[Shardblade\|Shardblades]], as well as the [[Honorblade\|Honorblades]]
Invested objects are harder to affect with any magic system, the more Investiture the more difficult to affect. Once an object has been Invested it is very hard to Invest it with a different kind of Investiture as well. Sometimes when an object in one of the Realms has a large amount of Investiture it can gain sentience (see, for example, [[Spren\|spren]] and Nightblood).

## Investiture of Natural Phenomena
It is possible for a natural force to become Invested. On [[Roshar\|Roshar]], [[Zahel\|Zahel]] states that the [[Highstorm\|highstorms]] are Invested. The [[Stormfather\|Stormfather]] also states that during a highstorm, [[Honor\|Honor]]’s power is concentrated in the storm as it moves across the land, temporarily joining all three [[Realms\|Realms]].

## Manifestations of Investiture
|**Investiture**|**World**|**Shard**|**Books**|
|-|-|
|[[Allomancy\|Allomancy]]|[[Scadrial\|Scadrial]]|[[Preservation\|Preservation]]|[[Mistborn (series)\|Mistborn]]|
|[[Feruchemy\|Feruchemy]]|[[Scadrial\|Scadrial]]|[[Preservation\|Preservation]], [[Ruin\|Ruin]]|[[Mistborn (series)\|Mistborn]]|
|[[Hemalurgy\|Hemalurgy]]|[[Scadrial\|Scadrial]]|[[Ruin\|Ruin]]|[[Mistborn (series)\|Mistborn]]|
|[[Awakening\|Awakening]]|[[Nalthis\|Nalthis]]|[[Endowment\|Endowment]]|[[Warbreaker\|Warbreaker]]|
|[[AonDor\|AonDor]]|[[Sel\|Sel]]|[[Devotion\|Devotion]], [[Dominion\|Dominion]]|[[Elantris (book)\|Elantris]]|
|[[Dakhor\|Dakhor]]|[[Sel\|Sel]]|[[Devotion\|Devotion]], [[Dominion\|Dominion]]|[[Elantris (book)\|Elantris]]|
|[[ChayShan\|ChayShan]]|[[Sel\|Sel]]|[[Devotion\|Devotion]], [[Dominion\|Dominion]]|[[Elantris (book)\|Elantris]]|
|[[Forgery\|Forgery]]|[[Sel\|Sel]]|[[Devotion\|Devotion]], [[Dominion\|Dominion]]|[[The Emperor's Soul\|The Emperor's Soul]]|
|[[Bloodsealing\|Bloodsealing]]|[[Sel\|Sel]]|[[Devotion\|Devotion]], [[Dominion\|Dominion]]|[[The Emperor's Soul\|The Emperor's Soul]]|
|[[Surgebinding\|Surgebinding]]|[[Roshar\|Roshar]]|[[Honor\|Honor]], [[Cultivation\|Cultivation]]|[[The Stormlight Archive\|The Stormlight Archive]]|
|[[Voidbinding\|Voidbinding]]|[[Roshar\|Roshar]]|[[Odium\|Odium]]|[[The Stormlight Archive\|The Stormlight Archive]]|
|[[Old Magic\|Old Magic]]|[[Roshar\|Roshar]]|[[Cultivation\|Cultivation]]|[[The Stormlight Archive\|The Stormlight Archive]]|
|[[Sand mastery\|Sand mastery]]|[[Taldain\|Taldain]]|[[Autonomy\|Autonomy]]|[[White Sand\|White Sand]]|
|[[Microkinesis\|Microkinesis]]|[[Yolen\|Yolen]]|*Unknown*|[[Dragonsteel\|Dragonsteel]]|
|[[Lightweaving\|Lightweaving]]|[[Yolen\|Yolen]]|*Unknown*|[[Dragonsteel\|Dragonsteel]]|
|[[Aether\|Aether]]|*Unknown*|*Unknown*|*Unknown*|



https://coppermind.net/wiki/Invest